High in this video we're going to continue looking at precedents and short circuiting for the boolean
operators.
Now as we saw the boolean operators not and or have a precedence on and not has a higher precedence
than and which has a higher precedence than all.
So let's take a look at the same example we saw in the lecture.
Let's take a look at.
True.
For true and false.
Well when we run this that evaluates to true.
Now let's see what actually happened what actually happened is that and has a higher precedence than
Or so it is going to get evaluated first.
And so what in fact what we have is really true or.
And then first calculate true and false.
And that's how we get true.
Now if we had done that differently and we're going to fall now or to be evaluated first and then we'll
have the and evaluated then what's going to happen is that true or true is true and true and false is
false.
So when we don't have the parentheses then the and gets executed first gets evaluated first with its
two operands which are true and false.
Whereas with the parentheses.
Well that takes higher precedence.
So we have to look at what's inside the parentheses first which is the off.
So we do.
True or true us.
And then we ended with false.
So it does make a difference.
So these two statements here are equivalent and yes it's true that they're equivalent.
It's true that yeah you can probably make out what this does.
And if you read it you know and you remember about the precedence then you would say oh okay it's going
to do the and forced but it is far clearer to somebody reading code that this is happening.
And so I would really suggest that you write it this way it really doesn't cost anything to add those
couple of parentheses in there.
And it will keep Bob happy.
I can't bring up Bob in here.
I only have it on my slides but Bob would be happy right here.
He wouldn't be too happy with this one.
So just a suggestion.
And of course as your boolean expressions get more complex then you really want to start putting in
the parentheses plus there might be cases where you have to put the parentheses in.
All right so the next thing I want to look at is the short circuiting
and short circuiting is really what happens when you have let's say a true or why.
Well when you have true a Y that will always return true.
No matter what y is.
And if we have false and Y this will always return false no matter what y is
right.
So what happens is that if we have an expression where the left operand evaluates to true and it's getting
old with something else Python will not evaluate y now.
Why could be just a boolean number or it could be a whole expression or even a function call that returns
a Boolean for a function call that returns an object that has obviously a truth value associated with
it.
So that's the whole deal.
Right.
Is that we don't have to evaluate necessarily both operands of an or.
Or an end.
In certain cases.
So let's take a look at an example we saw a couple in the video in the lecture but I'll do a slightly
different one here.
Let's do a equals 10 and B equals two.
And we want to run some code only if A is at least two times b.
So we might write something like this if a divided by B is greater than two then we might say you know
print a is at least
twice.
B And if it's not we don't want to do anything.
So kind of a silly example or a silly consequence of the statement but whatever that works for our illustration.
So if we're wrong that while we get that at least twice.
B Yeah because 10 divided by two is five A's actually five times larger than B five times the size of
B.
But what happens if we make be equal to zero.
Well let's try.
All right what's what do you think's going to happen.
Well we're dividing by zero so that that's going to create an issue.
It generally does if you try and divide by zero.
So we're probably going to want to try and avoid that problem.
And one way of doing it is to say if B is greater than zero and divided by B is greater than two we
can certainly do it this way.
That is one way of doing it.
Now of course we could even use nested if statements.
We wanted to we could do something like this and write it out.
OK.
So we have that I need to enter it and I want to bring make sure that a because non-zero and B is zero.
Let's run that and we get nothing.
Yeah because B is equal to zero.
It's not greater than zero.
OK.
So we could do it this way.
But because of short circuiting we can simply do this if zero.
And so if B is greater than zero and a Overbay is greater than 2.
And no no there's no problem.
That's because we're short circuited Since be greater than zero was false Python didn't need to evaluate
the right operand it didn't need to evaluate the expression it knew that whatever this was it was going
to be false.
So that's one way of doing it.
But of course truth values right be is a number and if it's zero it's going to have an associated truth
value of false.
So I don't even need to do this.
I can say if B and A divided by B is greater than two that's all I need to do right.
So this will work exactly the same way because B is truth the falsie not if B is zero.
It's falsie.
And again the short circuit means that this is not going to get evaluated.
And fair enough it doesn't happen.
However if B let's say is one that we get that A's at least twice.
B That works just fine.
Now we could even have the case in Kesh where B is none right.
This will still work if we do this.
We might have a little bit of an issue right because the greater than is not supported for none.
Well yeah none isn't a number.
It's just kind of nothing.
Right.
So this is why he's actually even if B is even a Bettison tax because we don't have to worry about when
the cases we're B can be none.
So go back to this example.
Everything works just fine.
All right.
So what.
That's one example of our using short circuit evaluation as well as combining it with truthiness of
objects in Python.
So let's take a look at another example.
And for this one the first thing I'm going to do is import the string module so we can look at the help
on the string module.
It's really very very useful module doesn't do much but it's quite useful.
It's a collection of string constants.
Right.
And so you have some string constants like whitespace ASCII lowercase ASCII uppercase digits hex digits.
And what it means is that it just is a predefined list of ASCII letters ASCII characters that fall into
certain categories.
Let's say you want to test if a string a character is let's say a lowercase characters.
Well all you could do.
Let's say you have a see.
You might say it's a in and we'll do a string dot.
Now we're looking for an uppercase ASCII character so we might do this.
C quite useful.
It returns false.
Now how did that work.
Well let's look at what passkey uppercase actually is.
And as you can see it's just a string with all the uppercase characters a through Z.
If we do string Dargis digits then we just get the digits from 0 to 9 right.
And if we do ASCII letters
then we get all the lowercase and uppercase letters and so on.
So it's just a quite useful little library that we can use that has some predefined string constants.
So in this case we're going to go back to that example we saw in the video and we're just going to test
to see if the first character of a string that we get back from a database actually starts with a number
or not.
And we don't want that so we might want to say hey you know a name that starts of a number is not allowed.
Something like that.
So I'm going to simulate of course opening a database connection and retrieving it.
And we're going to start with maybe the name let's say the name is Bob.
OK.
So we'll bring Bob back this way and we might do this say if name 0 PIN string digits.
Right.
So if the first character of name is digits then what do we want to do.
Well we might want to say print's name cannot start with a digit
so when we run this no problem if we start with a digit It tells us 9 cannot start of a digit.
So that's working just fine.
But what happens when a name is an empty string while we get an error.
Why.
Because while we're trying to return the false character of that string.
But it's an empty string.
There is no fourth character.
So our index in the string is out of range.
So then OK let's fix that.
Let's say Len of name must be greater than zero and k.
So let's do that.
And now that works right.
But first of all we don't have to put the greater than zero.
Learn of name is what it's going to be a number.
If the length of that string is 0 then it's going to return 0 and 0 is falsie.
If the length of the string is greater than zero can return some number that's non-zero and that is
truthy.
So technically we don't even have to put this in here.
We can dispute if Len name and when we run that works just fine.
But remember what we discussed in a previous video as well for sequence types sequence types will actually
return the length.
When you look at the truthiness.
So you don't have to look at the length.
You can just look at the name itself.
That will actually return the length right in terms of the truth value associated with name.
Right.
If we take a look at an example here name equals let's say B C and we look at bhool of name.
Well that's going to call the lend method that's on that string which is going to be three.
And so that's going to be truthy.
But if the string is empty then it's going to return false because the length is zero.
And that's falsie.
OK so we don't have to actually you know say lend name greater than zero we can just run it this way.
This works just fine.
Now in fact if we had kept this Lenn name greater than zero which works OK I mean that's fine but let's
say that name was not even defined.
Let's say that name came back from the database as a no then this means usually that name will become
a nun in Python.
And if we do that well we have an error again because why well none doesn't have a lend method.
There is no lenth to none.
So now we would have to say if name is not none and Len name is greater than zero and name zero and
string digits.
Now that will work because again we're short circuiting with short circuiting While name is not None.
Well it is not.
So name is not known as false and we have and and and so these two are getting short circuited.
There's no need to even evaluate them so this doesn't get evaluated.
And this doesn't get evaluated.
But of course we can shorten this whole thing here because if none is falsie or less of an empty string
is falsie so we can just basically collapse it down to this single thing.
Because if a name is not known and name has a length has a certain number of characters in it has a
non-zero lense then this will be truthy.
Any other any other combination of that it will be falsie name is none.
It would be faulty if name is not known but it is a string with no characters then it will also be false.
OK so this works equally well and we'll see more examples of short circuiting as we write more complex
code as we get further into the schools.
But for now just be aware that it's really useful for a lot of different things.
All right thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.